Sadhguru: Just outside of Baku. These fires have been burning for thousands of years.
4,200 years ago certain yogis from India went to Greece.
This is a Manipura Chakra.
Is an extraordinary presence of Vishuddhi, just hits you in the throat.
Life from somewhere has chosen this almost like an airport.
They're trying to build a future human being.
Azerbaijan means land of fire.
So, there are places where naturally natural gas is coming out,
seeping out of the land, and it's on fire.
So, for thousands of years these fires have been burning.
And this Hindu temple, which was built around this burning fire of natural gas,
is estimated to be over 8,500 years old.
It's been many times rebuilt, but the original one is supposed to be about 8,500 years old.
Here we are at the Fire Temple in Azerbaijan, just outside of Baku.
These fires have been burning for thousands of years.
This is a sacred space, and for the ancient Hindus of this land,
and also from Hindus from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the present day India,
which was all generally known as Hindustan at one time, all of them came here.
This is like another Kashi in Central Asia,
where people came here – one reason is to live, another reason is to die –
because this is a culture which identified that living well is very important,
but dying well is equally important.
So, for that reason, they always came to a sacred place to die,
as still millions of people go to Kashi to die.
This was one of the places that culture has diminished,
but still, a lot of thousands of pilgrims come here visiting this Fire Temple.
A little over 4,200 years ago certain yogis from India went to Greece,
and established certain Lingas, consecrated certain Lingas,
which are known as the ‘Navel of the Earth.’
I saw this picture almost like 15 years ago somewhere,
and immediately I recognized this is a Manipura Chakra,
and who created this, where is it? Then they said, “This is in Delphi.”
I've been wanting to go there, and took 15 years to get there,
because we went to these few places where the Lingas were,
and it's more than 4,200 - 4,300 years, and still alive.
They've replaced them, they took them from the original sites and kept it in the museums,
but still they're alive, you can't kill them, that's the beauty of it.
♪ Naagendra Haaraya, Trilochanaaya ♪
♪ Bhasmaanga Raghaaya, Maheshwaraaya ♪
♪ Nityaaya Shudhaaya, Digambaraaya ♪
♪ Tasmai Nakaaraya, Namah Shivaaya ♪
There are 3 chakras. Speaker: Yes.
Sadhguru: So, one is the navel.
The other two are the supporting chakras of Muladhara and Swadhishthana.
This is a fantastic way of doing it, that's how we've done the Bhairavi, but in a single form.
Here they're built like a temple. There are places like this in south India,
not this grand, but similar system of temples, where you build chakras.
If you have to do a composite form of all 3, or all 7, it's a much bigger challenge,
but to establish separately like this, it's so much easier.
Here we are at the Grand Canyon. [laughs]
It's formed over millions of years,
exposing geological history of this place,
which goes back to 1.8 billion years as they estimate.
It's essentially Colorado River
cutting down nearly a mile into the earth,
but here is a living proof of what kind of earth-moving happens
over a million years or so.
It's absolutely incredible, unimaginable!
Grand Canyon, as grand as it can be.
Initially I thought it's the rocks, but it's the very space.
And it's so sensitive to human presence,
and able to recognize certain things about what we're doing, it's quite incredible.
Just natural forces!
I'm sure those natives who are...
sensitive to this dimension,
who definitely say there are spirits working upon them,
which... they're not very wrong, in a way. [laughs] It's the spirit of the earth.
They're not very wrong, but not in the sense of some ghost functioning,
but there is a phenomenal amount of energy flow, and...
well, there are many places, natural features which have a certain amount of energy.
But the important thing is, the way it's responding to human presence.
[laughs] Unbelievable!
As we ranged through the plains of Wyoming,
one thing that stood out in my experience is Mato Tipila.
Mato Tipila is an extraordinary presence of Vishuddhi.
Not just unusual, it's just incredible that such a thing has manifested.
I don't know how, but it is a powerful sense of Vishuddhi.
I've never seen anything like that except Kailash.
Well, Dhyanalinga is there, but that's of a different nature, it's too subtle.
I've never seen a natural formation which exudes that kind of Vishuddhi.
Mato Tipila just hits you in the throat. It's one di... unidimensional.
So, because this is Vishuddhi, it is incredible that the rocks
have taken on 6-faced form, largely, most of them.
And there it stands magnificently today, almost like Shiva's throat.
It's a headless Shiva, that's what it's looking like. [laughs]
So, this dimension of life is very, very rare.
There are various centers in the world which activates different dimensions,
but the throat centre being this powerful is hardly 2, 3 places in the entire globe, I'm telling you.
I was just amazed the way it is reverberating with this dimension of life is just absolutely amazing.
I do not know how it has happened, nature has done it.
In India we create our own structures,
you know, we create consecrated structures to reverberate this kind of energy,
but what we make is of small proportions, but here it is standing in such a magnificent form.
One need not necessarily be in its physical presence,
one can connect with such a powerful dimension anywhere.
There is a tremendous amount of activity in the lake.
And this activity is... the nature of the activity is such,
that it has nothing to do with anything that we know as life on this planet.
It's something totally different.
It's life, but not the way we know it.
I wouldn't call Manasarovar a spiritual place, because...
spiritualities are of human being.
These beings – if you can call them that – I don't know what we can call them,
whether we can call them beings, or things, or creatures, or what.
We have no words for things or happenings which don't belong to our realm of experience.
They don't belong to anything that we know as life.
So, this is not really a spiritual place, but somehow...
life from somewhere has chosen this almost like an airport.
They are just landing, taking off, landing, taking off, at a tremendous pace.
This is just crazy.
This doesn't stand to any reason.
Why, for millions of years, one particular spot on the planet
has been used by life which doesn't belong here?
Why? And why the same place? And why for so long?
Seeing what's been happening in Manasarovar,
one conjecture could be
that these forces or these beings could be responsible for the making of the human beings;
that's one theory.
Another is, probably they were... they are trying to build a future human being.
Or this is their workshop
where they're trying to build themselves a human body
to participate in life that is happening here on this planet.
Why Kailash has always been considered as the abode of many great beings
is because many great beings chose to deposit their work,
preserve their work in Kailash.
Starting from Shiva himself,
and the first of the Tirthankars,
and two of greatest Buddhist teachers,
all these people chose Kailash Parvat as a place to preserve their work.
When I say preserving work,
for most mystics on this planet till now,
in all these thousands of years, if they get to share 1 or 2 percent of their work
with people around them, they are very fortunate;
most of them don't even get to do that.
So, they always chose to deposit
in some space which is not too frequented by human beings,
at the same time it's accessible for those who wish to go.
So, Kailash is such a place.
It is not totally inaccessible, but it's hard enough to discourage lot of people.
There are many, many places like that,
but in terms of the volume and the variety that's been deposited in Kailash, it is the place.

Dr. Laureys: We should try to find some, and reconnect to the spirituality.
Sadhguru: Anesthesia has nothing to do with consciousness.
There is consciousness even where there is no body.
You have the necessary instrument to experience this.
This will become an access point.
The scientific knowledge and the technology and modern medicine has really
incredibly improved our quality of life and our life expectancy.
But at the same time I think we should try to uhm...
find some, and reconnect to the spirituality,
or the pure experience, as you say.
Would you agree with that, that it's this kind of balance?
Sadhguru: See, it is like this: if you take a motorcycle mechanic,
he's very good with the motorcycles, let's say, but now you ask him to fix a computer.
Well, he can use his screwdriver and open the cover;
beyond that, he doesn't know a thing about it, all right?
This is just like this, objective sciences are like this.
It is always 1 + 1 is 2, that's the only way objectivity can work.
You cannot say 1 + 1 is 11 also, forget about a million, all right?
You cannot say that because this is the nature of objectivity,
and our objectivity is coming from our intellectual process.
Intellectual process it's coming from memory, so memory cannot be fudged.
If you fudge the memory, it's a mess.
I remember this is 1, and this is 1,
and now I put these 2 things together, and say this is 2.
Now, this has a memory basis – if I fudge this, then my intellect becomes useless, all right?
So, intellect is handling one aspect of our life,
which essentially we call it as self-preservation.
For our self-preservation, our intellect is vital, without it we cannot function.
Right now all the things that you said, “it has improved our life expectancy,
it enhanced our life in so many ways.”
No, it has not enhanced the quality of our life at all.
It has only enhanced the comfort and convenience levels in the world,
and definitely life expectancy – all this is definitely self-preservation, isn't it?
It's survival process. So, when it comes to self-preservation, our intellect is vital.
Without this one functioning, you cannot survive in this world.
All the 5 senses are functioning, they are feeding the data into your intellect,
and from there you're using it;
how efficiently you use it will determine how efficiently you survive.
So, your life expectancy enhanced means your efficiency of survival has increased, that's all it is.
So, you're more healthy than what people were in the past – I don't think so, but suppose we are –
it simply means your survival process is little more efficient.
So, leaving the survival process, now you're talking about consciousness.
Consciousness means... see, the English word ‘consciousness’ is very loosely used.
If you say somebody is in anesthesia, if they come back you say,
“Oh he's come back to his consciousness.”
See, everything that you do with your anesthesia has nothing to do with consciousness,
it has something to do with body, and various functions of the body.
You're shutting down certain aspects of the bodily functions.
One of them is transmission of pain, which is the main interest when somebody's going to surgery.
You don't want to stop their heart, you don't want to stop their brain,
you would like to see the transmission of pain stops.
Whatever is being cut is being cut, whatever damage or fixing that is happening is happening,
whatever parts of the body may be being removed, what is not vital may be being pulled out,
all that is happening, only transmission of pain is not happening.
This has got nothing to do with losing consciousness and gaining consciousness – there's no such thing.
Because there are no alternate words, we use the same words.
Language is a different aspect, language is also a product of our intellect,
so, it can only talk in opposites.
Without polarities there is no language, without polarities your intellect cannot function.
But when you talk about consciousness, you are not talking about 2 polarities.
There's no A-consciousness and B-consciousness,
there's no positive consciousness and negative consciousness – there's just one.
As we sit here, this is my body, that is your body,
distinctly established; right now it is 100% like this.
I don't know what you're drinking, I can't see, but whatever you're drinking,
what's in the cup is not you – the moment you drink it, after some time it becomes you.
This is happening right now.
So, though what you think is your body and what I think is my body is just a piece of this planet,
right now it is distinctly clear, this is my body, that is your body – 100%.
This is my mind and that is your mind, these are my emotions and those are your emotions,
these are my experiences, those are your experiences,
but there is no such thing as my consciousness and your consciousness.
This is a living consciousness. We blew our own bubble.
I'm sure you have... that little wonderful boy who came on the screen,
I'm sure he's blowing soap bubbles at you some time.
So, if you blow a soap bubble, this is my bubble, that's your bubble.
‘Puup!’ it went, then there is no such thing as my bubble and your bubble,
there's no such thing as my air and your air. Consciousness is just like this.
Right now you have blown your bubble, I have blown my bubble, this is me, that is you.
But when this goes ‘puup!’ there is no such thing as my consciousness and your consciousness.
It is just that, it is only the human creature on this planet
who has the neurological capability and sophistication of mechanism
that if they allow it, they can access this dimension of consciousness.
No other creature is really capable of accessing it.
This doesn't mean there is no consciousness in them;
without that, the life process wouldn't happen.
There is consciousness even where there is no body, all right?
Only thing is, you need a certain sophisticated instrument to access that,
which is the human mechanism – this is why we consider being human is a great privilege,
because you have access to dimensions beyond your physical boundaries.
That is the fundamental significance of being human.
So, let us not misunderstand the instrument, and what we see.
If you take a telescope and you saw another galaxy,
but the galaxy is not produced by the telescope, the galaxy is there.
The telescope only gave you an access.
Similarly, your body, your brain, whatever, I don't want to identify different things,
from your hair to your toes, everything is body as far as I'm concerned, including your brain,
it is just another dimension of the body.
So, this body, if we keep it in a certain way,
if we do not contaminate it with too many ideas, philosophies, identities,
if you keep it in a certain level of openness, this will become an access point
to what we are referring to as consciousness, or the basis of the life that we are.
You have the necessary instruments to experience it.
Not the instruments in your lab – you as a person, you have the necessary instrument to experience this.
Will you allow it or not is the only question.
As I said in the beginning, it all depends on how you're identified.
If your identifications are limited, you have lost the ability to experience it.
If your identity is, you know, not identified with anything, you kept yourself loose like that,
then there is a possibility of experiencing it.

Sadhguru: We lived our lives full, but no fear of God, no fear of hell, no fear of anything.
Hindu is not a religion, this is a godless land, no morality, no commandments.
The moment you make your body and mind into a stepping stone, you will become a Hindu.
This must happen to the world.
Hindu is not a -ism. [laughter]
Hindu is a land,
and over a period of time, Hindu became a civilization.
Hindu never was a -ism, nor is it today an -ism.
Well... because of political situations,
power tussles that happen among people, people will twist and turn whichever way they want.
But the identity of Hindu is of the land.
The land that lies between Himalayas and the Indu Sagara, which is the Indian ocean,
between the mountain ranges and the ocean, this land is Hindu.
The people who lived here naturally became Hindus, so it got referred to as Hindustan, the land of Hindus.
The land was Hindu, so people became Hindu. Because people became Hindu, the nation,
or all the nations which were there at that time in this region became collectively Hindustan.
Like when we say European: it may be French, it may be Italian, it may be Spanish, it may be...
now Ukraine. [laughter] We don't know who else will become European.
Turkey is becoming European. So, like that, different types of people, different kingdoms and empires,
during different times of history, all got to refer to...
all got referred to as Hindustan. Our civilization is not an outcome of one belief, or one teaching,
or it did not fall out of one book.
Variety of things happened. In terms of geography, in terms of ethnicity,
in terms of languages, in terms of culture,
variety of things happened across this land,
a variety which is quite unimaginable for most people.
Over 19,000 languages developed. 19,000 languages just in Hindustan.
That means there were that many cultures, that many types of people,
that many kind of cookings. [laughter] Yes.
Various things, a kaleidoscope.
Every which way you look at it, it's different.
But what is it about? If human intelligence is freed
from fear, guilt, and some silly reward somewhere else
– whether you call it heaven, paradise, swarga, whatever you call it –
some silly rewards up there, or fear of punishment, or guilt,
if these 3 things you remove from human mind, naturally human intelligence will seek.
Essentially, the idea of heaven, or paradise, or swarga,
is appealing only because they're infested with greed.
What is here is not enough – something more out there,
silly exaggerations of what you know here.
If these 3 things are removed from human intelligence, human intelligence will naturally seek the ultimate nature of who we are.
So, in this search, this civilization encountered astronomy.
Today everybody's got intellectual property rights. India is the only country which doesn't have intellectual property rights.
Everything that's Indian, or that belongs to this Hindustan,
has been stolen and used all over the world, everybody claiming it as their own.
Well... because they had gunpowder.
That's a lot of power, you know? So, we encountered astronomy,
we encountered mathematics. There wouldn't be mathematics in the world without this land and this civilization.
[applause] No, are you all clapping, “Oh, no mathematics in the school?” [laughter]
No, that's not what I'm saying. [laughs] If there is no mathematics, there is no science.
All the many things that we are doing in the world today, many things we are enjoying in the world today in terms of technology,
would not exist if there was no complex mathematics, which we encountered in our pursuit, in our search,
because we had no conclusions in our minds. We had no fear, nor were we infested with greed or guilt.
We lived our lives full, but no fear of God,
no fear of hell, no fear of anything, because...
we saw the most important thing is to seek, to know.
So, astronomy, mathematics, music...
well, there are variety of music, but if you pay attention, you will see, the classical music that evolved in this land,
in terms of complexity of its foundations, there is no other like it. This is not my opinion – the greatest musicians in the world will say this.
When there is a complex foundation, what you build can be anything, there is no limit.
If you do not have a complex enough foundation, what you build is minimal,
what you can build is minimal. So, there is a very complex understanding of mathematics, different aspects of it,
particularly geometry, astronomy. This is the culture, even 6 to 7,000 years ago,
clearly we are speaking about the planet being round, and planet going around the sun.
We did not believe that Earth is the center of the universe.
This came to us not because we were full of scientists in this country, this came to us because we were seekers.
If you're genuinely into science, you must be a seeker – you can't be a believer and be a scientist.
Simply not possible. Because belief means you've made conclusions about things that you have no clue about.
All these things we encountered, we came across mathematics, music, astronomy,
mysticism, many magical and mystical things, but we still pursued.
Because our pursuit was not to find this and that, which we think is useful to us,
we want to find the truth about our existence, the nature of what this is.
In this pursuit, we pursued endlessly.
As the seeking, and the pursuit, and the perception deepened,
and it became very profound, we found nothing.
[laughter] When we found nothing, we said, “Shiva.”
Then we found the basis of everything was this nothing.
The greatest miracle in the universe is this: that everything comes out of nothing and goes back to nothing.
Everything else, what you call as you and me, what you call as this planet,
what you call as this solar system, what you call as this universe or galaxies or cosmos,
these are all only manifestations. But we were not interested in the manifestations.
We enjoy the manifestation, we appreciate the manifestation, but our interest is to know what is the nature of the source?
We realized the source is actually not something, it is nothing.
And it's not in one place, it's just everywhere. So we say, ‘Shi-va’ – that means ‘that which is not.’
Well, people could not relate to it, so... they were looking for a form.
Then, human beings who are in very profound pursuit,
who realized the nature of the manifestation,
and its source, because they realized ‘that which is not,’ we called them Shiva.
So, the Shiva that you talk about today, that generally it's worshipped in this land,
he doesn't need worship, because he sits disinterested.
He's not somebody who is going to... [gestures] be influenced by your praise,
or your offerings of this and that. He simply sits disinterested.
This is why a more appropriate description of him is Adiyogi.
Shiva means ‘that which is not’ because that which is not cannot be seen, heard, smelled, touched.
One who realizes that also we hold as Shiva,
because one who realizes that becomes the doorway for that.
See, when you say ‘my home,’ if you think of, “Oh, I'm going home,”
you don't think of all the rooms, and bathroom, and toilet, and back door, and kitchen. No.
It's a front door, which is your home. When you arrive, “This is my home.” You're pointing at the front door and saying, “This is my home.”
So, the door is very important. So, one who becomes the doorway for that which is not,
we call him also Shiva.
So, this pursuit, what is the point? The point is this:
if you know the nature of the source,
if you have the time and inclination, you know the nature of everything.
If you know something, you will know only something. But if you know nothing, then everything is possible.
So, this pursuit is the basis of this civilization.
This is a land of seeking, not a land that believes. This is a godless land – there is no ‘the God’ anywhere.
As I have told you many times, we know the technology of god-making.
Well, there are words like this, we say... call something ‘Bhagawan.’
You must understand the Bhagawan, the word Bhagawan comes from the root word ‘bhajj,’
which means that you look up to, that you revere, that which is glorious.
So, if a human being, or a tree, or a mountain,
looks glorious to us, we say, ‘Bhagawan’
because it's worthy of my reverence.
Anything that deeply impacts you becomes your Bhagawan. When we say Bhagawan, we're not talking about the God sitting up there in heaven,
who knows how to manage everything here. No.
If you look back at the history of this planet, you obviously know God doesn't know how to manage things. [laughter]
Hello? [laughter]
Are you willing to hand over your life to God and say, “Do it the way you want?” No...
Things that are not in your hands you're willing to give it to him. Things that are in your hands... [gestures] [laughter]
Your money, throw it in front of the temple and go away, let me see. No... [laughter]
What you don't have, of course. [laughter]
Lot of people come to me also and say, [speaks in Tamil]. [laughter] [speaks in Tamil] [laughter]
That means, “I want to... I'll give my life to you Sadhguru, right now.” “Hey, don't, don't. Hold it, hmm?” [laughter]
Hold it – if you hold it there and then give yourself, then I know how to use it.
If you give it away, what do I do? [laughter]
So, this is not that kind of civilization.
This is a civilization of exploration, and whichever way you explore, it is regarded well.
You may explore in a very stable, proper manner,
or you may explore in freaky ways, whichever way, as long as you're seeking,
in this culture it's okay. There are very systematic disciplines in the country, in this land.
At the same time, there are absolutely wild ways. There are aghoris, there are tantrics, there are a variety of people,
because nothing is a taboo as long as you're seeking, as long as your intent is to touch the core of life that you are.
Knowing that the core of life is not somewhere in the center of the galaxy,
the core of life is in every life. Whether you're a man, woman, animal, even if you're an ant,
the core of life is within you also, all you have to do is find it.
All you have to do is find access to it: you don't have to invent it, you don't have to make it up, you just have to find access.
Life cannot be happening without the source of life throbbing inside,
otherwise it'll not happen. So today, human intellect is...
not yet, but definitely far more active
than what it used to be 500 years ago, or 300 years ago, or even 100 years ago,
becoming less influenced by the dogmas of the times.
The dogma can be your religion, the dogma can be the current political ideology that's going about,
the dogma can be some local philosophy, at different times, different things have ruled human beings.
For the first time in the history of humanity, intellect...
the human intellect is not as ruled by the dogmas of the place,
or the doctrines of the times, as it has been in the past. I believe this is going to be much, much more in the next 15 to 25 years,
where human belief systems will become very thin.
People only believe to the extent it's necessary – already it is so. Hello?
Only to the extent it's necessary, rest is all in your hands. You don't trust anybody.
Well, I'm not encouraging that, but it's a good beginning that you understand,
somewhere you understand, “Unless I handle this life well, it won't work.”
This means you understand “my life is my karma” – you're becoming a Hindu. [laughter/applause]
So, you must understand Hindu is not an -ism, Hindu is not a religion,
Hindu is not a particular way of life as people are trying to define. Hindu is a land – because of the land, people became Hindu.
Because of the people, the civilization became Hindu. Because of the civilization, the nation became Hindustan.
So, this needs to be understood, that if you release human intellect,
as I said earlier, from the influence of fear,
from the influence of guilt, from the influence of extreme greed,
you will become a Hindu. Or Hindu, maybe in your mind is... the context is very small,
it's a particular type of people; no, no, so let's put it this way: it is called Sanatana Dharma. The word Sanatana literally means eternal.
Dharma means not religion, Dharma means the law.
So, the eternal law – what is the eternal law?
See, as we sit here, you and me are different.
Well, they will bury me or burn me much earlier than you, all of you are much younger to me.
But even after 100 years, if they bury you, you also become the same thing that I have become.
Now the aspiration for you to become what I have become, that's a different thing.
But when everybody is put back, everybody becomes the same thing without any problem.
So, the realization that everything comes from the same thing,
will it happen to you with death, or now? There's a big difference.
If you're aspiring that it should happen now, you are a sanatani.
You're aspiring for your eternal nature; that means you are at the Sanatana Dharma.
Not as a religion, not as a philosophy, you are in tune with the eternal laws.
Only if you're in tune with the eternal laws, the limitations of this manifestation,
the individual manifestation has many limitations. These limitations you will suffer endlessly. No matter how endowed you are, you still suffer.
No matter what you become in your life, you will still suffer, because you're identified with the manifestation, you are not searching for its source.
You have not found access to the fundamental nature of its existence,
which is its eternal nature. Now, am I propounding, “oh, there is something eternal within you,
you are a soul, and this will happen, that'll happen?” No. I'm saying you understand, you gather the body, and you shed the body.
Once you realize this, there is enough intelligence in every damn head here
to seek what is this about. “Okay, I gathered this, and it's going to go one day – what is this about?”
Because this is not unreal, this is true. Your existence is true.
These days technology people are trying to look like sages, with long hair, knotted dreadlocks, you know, they're all trying to look like sages.
This is a good trend. [laughs] They're trying to look like the Hindu sages of the past. [laughter]
So essentially, a totally godless, philosophy-less, immoral
– immoral is not the word, amoral – no morality, no commandments, no god, no philosophy.
What kind of lousy people will they be? That means you don't trust the intelligence of creation.
You think creation will be good only if some fools manage it.
No. Creation is good without management. It is just that once, as I said,
if human intelligence is not encumbered with these imposed values of fear, and guilt,
and greed, which is encouraged all the time, naturally this will seek its eternal nature.
So, what you call as the Hindu civilization, or better that we call it Sanatana Dharma,
is a consequence of fearless, guiltless,
greedless human beings. [applause]
So, it is not because of Hindu way of life they became like that;
because they were like that, this is the consequence. This civilization is a consequence of that.
But, as all of us know, in recent history, – in this land, when we say recent, we are saying 1,000 years ago – [laughter]
in recent history it has been ravaged like no other land.
Probably most of you do not know, because those who wrote our history books and textbooks,
they wanted to be nice to you, so they eliminated all the ugly parts of our history,
so that we may once again walk into similar situations. But the land has seen, the people have seen enormous atrocities,
atrocities which are way bigger than anything that is normally talked about in the world.
The greatest things that we talk about in the world is how Africa was subjugated by the Europeans,
and how Adolf Hitler did what he did in pre-World War II times,
and what happened in North America to the Native Americans, but what happened in this land, both in numbers and quality of torture, much, much, much more.
But this is the only land, after 1,000 years of extreme torture,
we still retained our way of being. [applause]
This is simply because of the way the entire thing was naturally structured.
Because it was not a religion – there was no one head that if you cut that head off, everything will collapse.
There was no one doctrine, there was no one book – if you burn it, everything will be gone.
Because it was individual seeking. The invaders who came, they did everything possible: they killed all the leaders,
religious teachers, they ravaged thousands of temples. But they didn't know how to kill it, because it was in everybody's hearts and minds.
You cannot kill that one because... [applause]
because it was not a philosophy that could be corrected, it was not a belief system that could be obliterated.
It was a natural longing to know; there is no way to curtail that. As I've said – I'm repeatedly saying this – if you free this mind of fear, greed, and guilt,
this will naturally seek its eternal nature. Because of thousands of years of establishing that kind of thing,
doesn't matter how much torture, it still lived. This is the only land which has been invaded with the vengeance,
or with the force with which it has been invaded, still retained its culture to a large extent.
Damages happened, but it retained, because this is not the culture which is organized.
It is an organized kind of chaos, intentional chaos,
because you can't destroy a chaos, you can destroy a system. Hello? [laughs]
You can destroy a system, but you can't destroy a chaos. So, it doesn't matter what they did, it survived.
A lot of people are writing books today around the world, many American and European writers,
they're amazed how this culture survived. How did it survive, what is the basis, where is the foundation for this?
There's no foundation, that's why it survived. [laughter]
[applause]
Because the foundation is in our evolution, the foundation is in the nature of our existence.
The foundation is not in what we organized as human beings. It is not a church, it is not some kind of organization, it is not...
there's one leader that if you kill him everything will collapse. Do what you want, you don't even know where it exists, but it exists. [applause]
So, if we do this one thing, if we do this one thing in this generation,
that in the world – it's beginning to move that way, but I would like to see it in my time –
if we move the society, if you move the world's population in this direction,
they are free of fear, they are free of guilt, and they are free of greed,
you will see, Sanatana Dharma will sprout across the planet. [applause]
This you must understand, Sanatana Dharma does not mean all of them will chant your mantra,
or all of them will do this. No. All of them will seek – that's all that matters.
Which way they seek, we don't care. Hello? We don't care how they seek.
As long as they're seeking their eternal nature,
as long as they're seeking their ultimate possibility, we call them sanatani.
Because Sanatana does not mean a particular group of people, Sanatana means eternal nature.
So, what is Hinduism?
There is no such thing, there is no -ism. People are trying to make it into a -ism for survival purposes, unfortunately.
But I don't fear survival, I only see a metamorphosis.
Many people think I am not Hindu enough [laughter]
because I don't know any... I'm not doing any pooja, I'm not doing any mantra, I'm not going here and there and doing what a Hindu is supposed to do.
So, “What kind of a Hindu is he?” Well... because I'm born in this land, in terms of geography I am a Hindu.
Because my longing has always been to know the eternal nature of who we are,
and because of that I'm a sanatani, not because I subscribe to any of their philosophies.
I want to see every human being looks for that
which is the ultimate nature of who we are, then everybody is a sanatani. But don't think they are converting to your religion, because there is nothing to convert to.
There is no ideology, there is no philosophy, there is no God, there is no God's army for you to convert and join.
It's just that from its manifestations to its source,
your attention has shifted from the manifestation to its source.
This means you're a sanatani. Because manifestations are always transient, it's like a footprint:
it'll be there today, it'll be gone tomorrow, but the source is always there.
So, once your interest has shifted from the body to the source of what it is,
you have become a sanatani, you're seeking the eternal nature.
This must happen to the world – not as a religion, not as a philosophy,
but as a natural longing to know beyond what is right now manifested.
Because manifestations are many and fantastic,
but if you get identified with the manifestation, then...
you will become so small, that... see, largely human beings don't even consider other lives as life.
Only human is life. But now in that also, in 21st century we have come to a place
where we're beginning to think men and women are two separate species. Hello? [laughs]
We don't think we are the same species anymore, we are different species. Because everything you have to say, both... but now there are many other species.
[laughter] I'm not saying this with any disregard for anybody,
I'm just saying we are unnecessarily complicating a simple process of life.
First of all, biology is a simple thing. Its purpose is very simple and limited, we don't have to complicate the biology.
See, when we say, “you're a sanatani,” this does not mean you're disregarding the biology,
or the psychology of a human being. We're not going away from it; we want to be above it, that's all.
Is it worthwhile? Participants: Yes. Sadhguru: We are not talking about discarding it, we are not talking about moving away from it,
we want to be above it, so that we can use our biology and our psychology the way we want,
that our biology doesn't use us up. But for most human beings, their biological needs and psychological needs
are occupying the whole time of their life, isn't it? They don't get to settle their biology or psychology for their entire life!
If they live to be 100, they're still desperately doing the same things.
So, Sanatana means this: that you're above the manifestation of physiological and psychological manifestations that we have,
and that goes for every manifestation. But your biggest blocks are your own body and your own mind.
If I take you to a place, let's say we took you to the greatest, most sacred place in the universe.
There are steps, but you misunderstood steps as blocks.
What to do? Tragedy you are, isn't it? Hello?
Right now, that's all that's happened. This body, this mind, this level of cerebral capability, these emotions,
these energies, this chemistry, these are all stepping stones, but you're right now experiencing them as blocks in your life.
They're blocking you completely. Life is getting mortgaged just to settle physiological needs and psychological needs.
You can call it what you want, you can call it religion, you can call it family, you can call it marriage, you can call it whatever,
but essentially, life is getting mortgaged just to settle physiological and psychological needs.
These are stepping stones upon which you should stand, and climb, and go beyond, but unfortunately they have become sinking sands.
So, the moment you make your body and mind into a stepping stone, and stand above that,
you are a sanatani. [applause]

the solar flares have kicked out the next six years there is a extra stimulus and all the energies that work upon this planet whenever these solar flares happen battles happened disastrous events happened segments of society could rise Music the solar flare activity in the sun has gone up significantly and it's going up further Music maybe about 17 18 months ago it started when the solar flares increase it has a significant impact on the magnetic field of the planet and the amount of radiation that happens have various things I don't want to go into the science of it but it has serious impact on all planets Our concern is Earth a few people who come from Mars Music adults have their own problems but on planet Earth there is significant impact all life is impacted well once again because today we have come to this place in the world unless you believe mark my words unless you believe you understand unless you believe you understand you cannot accept anything it's a very crippling state but unfortunately people have come to this when I say you believe you understand do you really understand how this planet is spinning and how it is going around the Sun and how this is all working and how it is impacting your body and how you're living and how your breath is happening do you really understand but you read it in the sixth standard textbook you're a textbook scientist and you know all of it you know you know everything so essentially except for a few top notch scientists Maybe but the rest of them science is like religion they just believe what is said in one book if you believe you become religious if you believe what is said in many textbooks you become scientific very few people are real scientists who are genuinely exploring so for most of the humanity I'm talking about the educated class of people science is generally lack religion only thing is with science you could change your opinion after two years with religion if you change you will get poked except for that it is the same kind of belief system Music so these solar flares are happening autonomic nervous system is seriously impacted by this everybody knows this I know this somewhat happens in my system and I see how it is happening in other people's systems digestive system your breathing process your ability to digest your ability to breathe and absorb what you need to absorb everything is affected by the solar Flats so when they started the solar flares started happening and I felt certain things within my system then I am quiet with a few people what is happening it's like feels like this then they said the soul our Flats have kicked out the next six years they will beard a very high pitch the kind of pitch that we have not seen in our lifetime atleast Music so now the solar activity one way is in the Indian traditions and in scriptures and other things I am not an expert on this but I know it has been said that when solar activity Rises like that there could be a lot of death there could be disease there could be Wars there could be psychological imbalances there could be lot of turmoil in human life and lot of upheavals in animal life every life on the planet because it affects your nervous system digestive system pulmonary system everything now is it causing harm to us no no it's just like this see suppose the wind is blowing like this let's say wind is blowing from this direction is that okay it blows from that direction okay now you are trying to resist it'll be a real nuisance you won't be able to do anything if the wind is blowing hard enough or let us say you want to fly you want to fly if the wind is blowing like this if you go into the wind without much effort without much fuel you'll just take off but if you try to go with it your airplane will crash or your glider will crash whatever it is you're trying to fly so the wind is a boom for somebody who knows how to use it it's a curse for somebody else who does not know how to use it this is true with every Force in the universe the solar flares also are like this wow I did not predict that there will be a pandemic or something but I knew there will be something happening because I don't try to decipher these things with thoughts I just see things as they are I knew something not so good will be happening to people so in the month of February we really is the death book eight years it's been in the works and people who were working on it wanted to be perfect death you know they worked on it they worked on it they worked on it it came back to me I worked on it give it back to them again they come back one more question one more question backward vote it's been going on for eight years then I put a deadline it has to be finished by end of January in 2020 and February we published it Music a lot of people in India asking me satguru you knew hey I am not the one who brought the virus from wherever I did not know if I knew I would have told you it's coming I did not know I just knew that something is not good people will go through some turmoil so we released the death book and o of by March people who are dying all over the place literally everywhere in the world March April of uh 2020 you remember so these solar flares started about 17 months ago maybe which increased its activity it could go on for another four and a half years Music in this time will Humanity bring disaster upon themselves or will they bring realization and transformation upon themselves he is in the hands of human beings this is why conscious Planet as a moment becomes super significant so this if you're conscious this is a fantastic time because I want you to understand this it is only in the summer when the sun is really hot all the plants really burst out they know how to make use of the sun's energy you will say oh very hard on winter also of course you were complaining but something new every season gives you something new to complain Music whether it is a climatic season or your life Seasons always complaining about something because you don't learn how to write it so the solar flats for a spiritual Seeker who wants to transform his energy ah well this is a time when everything is cooking really well I want to make sure all the consecrations I want to do I finish within this next four and a half years because son himself with me probably is not 100 this is most probably 80 percent I am correct on this but it could be a little off probably oh by mid 2023 to Mid 2024 those 12 months probably or at least nine months it could be at it speak so at that time will we bring realization to the world or disasters to the world or will nation start shooting at each other I don't know I would like to see something very positive when wonderful happens but I'm just one man am I just one man then why are you keeping quiet I'm just one man in ancient times in India certain yogis have been described as s a has rang a that means that Yogi had a thousand ounce do I have only thousands Music thank you hey you said you have an army I heard that word army takes commands whatever yes sir anime I don't want the answer from you but I want you to come to your senses because this is going to be next few years A charged up time on this planet are we going to use this charge for transformation realization or are we going to stab at each other kill each other do something terrible to each other because some stimulus is happening in our body we don't have Equanimity then we will damage each other this is where we are you will watch it as it progresses and there is enough scientific study today to support this but this is these solar Flats have been mocked in the yogic calendar in the past Music whenever solar Flats Rose to a certain pitch it is happening all the time but certain times I don't think there is any particular kind of time table for that it is just happens for whatever reasons I don't think anybody has really figured out why it happens and why the timing of it uh because probably the Cycles may be in millions of years there is nobody here to observe that exactly why it happens at a certain given time our observations are all of a few centuries so we really do not know but whenever the solar flares happened great yogis Rose in that culture at the same time battles happened disastrous events happened sometimes earthquakes happened because the magnetic forces in the planet and the thermal forces in the core of the planet are all being influenced by the solar flesh so if a volcano erupts if you have a gallery view of a volcano going off full on what a fantastic view you wouldn't want to miss it isn't it only if you are at the foothills and you're going to become part of the Mountain Stone that's not a good thing so every force in the world is like this so when something like this is happening the populations on the planet should have the wisdom to get themselves to the right place so that this extra force that is being exerted upon this planet could work to our advantage this is why approaching every aspect of your life becomes super important otherwise there will be pain there will be death there will be problems at least if we cannot change the whole world that also should not be impossible in today's level of communication because never before we could communicate with people as we can do today because of the Technologies we have using the Technologies and the solar flares we can make these next four and a half years tremendous time for Humanity but if we don't at least segments of society segments of human population could rise those who do not make use of it we do not know how it will go it's not like some kind of sweeping disaster will happen earthquake will happen flood will happen it's not necessarily like that but there is a extra stimulus and all the energies that work upon this planet the geo magnetic forces and nuclear radiations and the Magnetic tail that is there behind the earth and the way Moon relates to the planet and how it redirects these energies of the flesh towards the Earth what it does all these things will have some kind of stimulus when extra stimulus happens you know like whether I am writing not the motorcycle these days these are modern motorcycles when I rode there was only one mode my mode today there are modes off road mode rain mode uh touring and Sport I always keep it in the sport whatever I write because I want it on full power so when I'm riding either in India or here the other day I was writing well the rear wheel is little fishtailing a bit because because they're high powered motorcycles if you put it on rain mode it will reduce what extent means uh it is under around 160 BHP for a two wheeler it's a lot if you put it on rain mode it will become 90 BHP so that it will become safe but you know I am not a safe I I'll die of boredom if it's safe so I keep it on the sport mode and ride in the rain oh little funny it does little back wheel when extra power is there you can do things which you cannot do without the necessary power isn't it so right now it's that kind of a situation there is extra everything on the planet and it's going to rise in the next year or so when this happens we can either break our bones or we can rise and everybody should rise whatever we can do we should do to see that Humanity Rises because there is a kind of energy that is very difficult to generate by ourselves and the entire planet is being influenced by that Music if we are seeking Evolution we could have slowly done it we are not looking for evolution Music we are seeing how to mutate you Music if you have to attain to your own sense of energy so you take a very long time certain times have been created where it will be at its peak intensity there is a kind of energy that is very difficult to generate by ourselves and the entire planet is being influenced by that mid 2023 to Mid 2024 Music this is a fantastic time Music foreign